Delta Tauri Blogpost (#1146)
deltachat/deltachat-pages: _posts/2025-07-20-delta-tauri-project.md

- Confidence to contribute:
  - We can easily compile rust for all platforms and also Tauri is small so it does not take hours or days to compile compared the beast of a C++ project that is chromium.
  - It's code base is relatively easy to grasp, because at it's core it is "just" a web view wrapper instead of a whole browser fork with custom patches.
- Smaller package size (because it uses the system's browser)

But it is not without its disadvantages: you suddenly have 2 different browser engines to optimize for (Chromium and WebKit[^webkit]) and Tauri is much younger than Electron.
While Electron has a fairly complete API out of the box, in Tauri you have plugin, but some Tauri plugins lack important functionality.
Like in the notification plugin there is no way to listen for clicks on notifications (from rust), so we made our own crate to directly interface with the system APIs.

Another point is compiling speed and cross-packaging for other platforms, both are faster on

> Electron because there you don't need to compile code, just package it together. And of course rust still takes some it's to compile, which can take about 10-15 min (cold/full build) or much longer if you are using a slow computer.

Author: there is a typo in this sentence: "some it's to compile"

Tauri does not have access to the file scheme in general, so we load all files over custom schemes that don't allow arbitrary file system access:

```
dcblob://<account folder name>/<blob filename>
```

<!-- TODO: mention audit and quotes from it  -->

### The Differences

Tauri uses the Operating System's webview for the frontend and native rust code instead of a Node.js runtime for the backend.

This has the advantage of resulting in smaller binaries and install size. Additionally, the system webview is updated independently of Delta Chat, so security updates may reach the users faster - but only if they update their system.

But using the system webview can also be a disadvantage, in electron we ship the webview/browser with the app, so we know exactly what version it has, in Tauri we do not control this aspect.

> The system webview also means we now have two target browser engines to work with: webkit on macOS and linux, and WebView2/chromium on Windows. If you familiar with web-development then you already know that there are sometimes inconsistencies in how browsers behaves, what features and APIs they support and how they render style sheets.

Author: ```suggestion
The system webview also means we now have two target browser engines to work with: webkit on macOS and linux, and WebView2/chromium on Windows. If you are familiar with web-development then you already know that there are sometimes inconsistencies in how browsers behaves, what features and APIs they support and how they render style sheets.
```

#### Download and Installation Size

In the case of Delta Chat Tauri the download size was reduced by around 60-80% and the installation size was reduced by over 80% compared to the electron edition.
The size of the Flatpak download decreased, but the platform dependency increased by 54%, so the space-saving is not that huge, unless you also have other Flatpak apps using the gnome platform dependency.

<figure>

> 	<img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/download-size-comparison-chart.svg">

Author: I added it to the `<figcaption>`, is that enough? or should it be also added to the image?

> 	<img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/download-size-comparison-chart.svg">

Reviewer: Yes, I meant the images themselves.
But it's probably file.

	<figcaption>Download size comparison between Electron and Tauri releases (pre-release 1.59.0)</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
	<img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/install-size-comparison-chart.svg">
	<figcaption>Installation size comparison between Electron and Tauri releases (pre-release 1.59.0)</figcaption>
</figure>

You can find the data from our test on <https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/5239>.

#### RAM usage

> This is not generally about Tauri, instead this is about the Tauri Edition of Delta Chat Desktop. You could see more benefits in your project. (most benchmarks comparing Tauri and Electron, that I saw, reported that Tauri has big savings)

<br />

|                                     | Electron (on Linux)                                                           | Tauri (on Linux)                                                           |
| ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Processes: just main window         | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-electron-ram-linux.png" style="width: 100%;">                 | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-tauri-ram-linux.png" style="width: 100%;">                 |

Author: cpu usage is not really relevant and could be also removed

> | Processes: just main window         | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-electron-ram-linux.png" style="width: 100%;">                 | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-tauri-ram-linux.png" style="width: 100%;">                 |

Reviewer: <img width="530" height="268" alt="dc-tauri-ram-linux-with webxdc app" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f8b6cb39-c8f7-4c92-b2a7-82dfb7a3ea89" />
<img width="724" height="406" alt="dc-electron-ram-linux" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/291833d8-441d-445a-a05f-56ca881323ec" />
<img width="724" height="459" alt="dc-electron-ram-linux-with-webxdc-app" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/09a41c48-5ac6-4363-9d14-1d4fdec4da54" />
<img width="530" height="171" alt="dc-tauri-ram-linux" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/658aab6f-f07b-455e-90da-1a9c7505473b" />

Here they are. [updated-blog-screenshots.zip](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/21557743/updated-blog-screenshots.zip)

| Total: just main window             | 405.69 MB                                                                     | 634.7 MB                                                                   |
| Processes: main window + webxdc app | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-electron-ram-linux-with-webxdc-app.png" style="width: 100%;"> | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-tauri-ram-linux-with webxdc app.png" style="width: 100%;"> |
| Total: main window + webxdc app     | 519.09 MB                                                                     | 716 MB                                                                     |

<br />

> | operating system & distribution format | Electron    | Tauri       |

Author: what do you mean with "others"?  the charts for install- and download size or the screenshots in the previous table

> | operating system & distribution format | Electron    | Tauri       |

Reviewer: Yes, I mean the comparison bar charts.

> | operating system & distribution format | Electron    | Tauri       |

Author: my confidence that the data is accurate is much lower, because ram usage is not that easy to measure correctly when it seems to change often.

Ideally we would need more tests and use a different chart type to plot the results. But I think that is too much effort, so I would just keep the table as is.

| -------------------------------------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| Linux: Flatpak                         | ~374-536 MB | ~347-380 MB |
| Linux: Debian                          | ~171.2 MB   | ~493.7 MB   |
| macOS                                  | ~260 MB     | ~326 MB     |
| Windows                                | ~166 MB     | ~211 MB     |

Unfortunately RAM usage is not much less compared to Electron, often Delta Chat Tauri even uses more RAM than Electron.

### State of Tauri Edition

The Tauri edition has all features that the electron version has besides of the location streaming map, but there are still some bugs especially on Linux.

> 

Author: lack of "time", basically I wanted to prototype an extension system for it instead of mixing it with the webxdc code. - but this was out of scope for the tauri project.

the webxdc method could probably be implemented in a few days, but we should really use core's http proxy instead of allowing internet access and fetching the map tiles over the browser bypassing the proxy that the user set.

  - Linux: notification issue with flatpak [deltachat-desktop#5095](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/5095)
- upstream issues in Tauri/WebKit:
  - Windows: focus issues with keyboard navigation [tauri#13466](https://github.com/tauri-apps/tauri/issues/13466)
  - Linux: crash because of missing `gstreamer` dependency [deltachat-desktop#5195](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/5195)
  - Crashes and Glitches on Nvidia GPU [tauri#9394](https://github.com/tauri-apps/tauri/issues/9394)
  - missing camera and microphone support [deltachat-desktop#4932](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/4932#issuecomment-2927910551) [tauri#8426](https://github.com/tauri-apps/tauri/discussions/8426#discussioncomment-8268622)

We tested the features that depend on system integration and documented the results in [deltachat-desktop#5239](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/5239).

> 

Author: > It would be helpful to say something about the show-stopper. How are the chances they will be addressed "soonish" (especially the upstream issues).

I guess it is unlikely that they are addressed soon, unless someone takes the initiative and drives such an effort.

For the issues that we can solve, it depends whether that is a priority for us:
- the disappearing attachments bug is likely a core bug that we should find and fix anyway, since it could also appear outside of tauri (in theory)
- single instance hand-off -> that's likely some rust scheduling issue in our code with async, I found that hard to debug, but I guess some of our rust experts could find it easily.

> Having no mic & speaker access will be even more severe if deltachat has calls.

we could access those from rust directly, if we do calls with WebRTC then this will be more of a problem, unless we also want to use WebRTC from rust. (atleast on linux, on windows and mac camera and microphone work)

### Where can you try it?

As we established in this Blog post, the Tauri edition is not good enough yet to fully replace the electron version. We already release it next to the electron version, so if you want to try it, checkout this forum post for details: <https://support.delta.chat/t/help-test-the-tauri-pre-release/3827>

### Conclusion

<!-- TODO rephrase, what's our message? -->

While Tauri's Linux support is disappointing, the project still opened up a lot of possibilities and is working nicely on Windows and macOS for the most part.

> The only feature still missing is the map for location streaming.

Reviewer: Oh, and also mention the fact that Electron remains the "main" version of DC Desktop.

> The only feature still missing is the map for location streaming.

Author: don't you normally put tl;dr to the top of the content?

> The only feature still missing is the map for location streaming.

Reviewer: I don't think it matters if it's at the top or at the bottom. But as long as you have the "Conclusion" section, it should be enough of a summary, I think.

| Processes: main window + webxdc app | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-electron-ram-linux-with-webxdc-app.png" style="width: 100%;"> | <img src="{{ page.asset_prefix }}/dc-tauri-ram-linux-with webxdc app.png" style="width: 100%;"> |
| Total: main window + webxdc app     | 519.09 MB                                                                     | 716 MB                                                                     |

<br />

| operating system & distribution format | Electron    | Tauri       |
| -------------------------------------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| Linux: Flatpak                         | ~374-536 MB | ~347-380 MB |
| Linux: Debian                          | ~171.2 MB   | ~493.7 MB   |
| macOS                                  | ~260 MB     | ~326 MB     |
| Windows                                | ~166 MB     | ~211 MB     |

Unfortunately RAM usage is not much less compared to Electron, often Delta Chat Tauri even uses more RAM than Electron.

### State of Tauri Edition

> The Tauri edition has all features that the Electron version has besides of the location streaming map, but there are still some bugs especially on Linux, which prevent us from fully switching to Tauri.

Author: ```suggestion
The Tauri edition has all features that the Electron version has (except for calling and the location streaming map), but there are still some bugs especially on Linux, which prevent us from fully switching to Tauri.
```

We tested the features that depend on system integration and documented the results in [deltachat-desktop#5239](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/issues/5239).

### Where can you try it?

As we established in this Blog post, the Tauri edition is not good enough yet to fully replace the electron version. We already release it next to the electron version, so if you want to try it, checkout this forum post for details: <https://support.delta.chat/t/help-test-the-tauri-pre-release/3827>

### Conclusion

While Tauri's Linux support is disappointing, the project still opened up a lot of possibilities and is working nicely on Windows and macOS for the most part.
All features are implemented, except for the location streaming map.

So for now we will stay with the Electron edition for the official releases.
For the curious, we release the Tauri edition as well with each new release since `1.60.0`.

Thanks to the Tauri developers for making Tauri and

> Thanks to nlnet for funding the DeltaTauri project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to NLnet for funding the DeltaTauri project.
```

Also "Electron" is still lowercase.

### Security

Tauri has really great security features, we used their [capability system](https://v2.tauri.app/security/capabilities/) to restrict which window has access to which API calls. For example, webxdc windows can not access APIs meant for the main window, like changing settings:

```toml
identifier = "webxdc"
webviews = ["webxdc:*"]
permissions = [
  "allow-send-webxdc-update",
  "allow-get-webxdc-updates",
  "allow-join-webxdc-realtime-channel",
  "allow-leave-webxdc-realtime-channel",
  "allow-send-webxdc-realtime-data",
  "allow-register-webxdc-channel",
  "allow-webxdc-send-to-chat",
]
```

You can find the capabilities for all windows at [deltachat-desktop/packages/target-tauri/src-tauri/capabilities](https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-desktop/tree/main/packages/target-tauri/src-tauri/capabilities).

<blockquote>
  <p>As someone who worked on the Tauri 2.0 audit, I appreciated the use of window capabilities to further sandbox webxdc apps.</p>
  <footer>— Morgan Hill <a href="https://infosec.exchange/@pcwizz">@pcwizz@infosec.exchange</a></footer>

> </blockquote>

Author: I want a prettier design/css for this quote.

| Total: main window + webxdc app     | 519.09 MB                                                                     | 716 MB                                                                     |

<br />

| operating system & distribution format | Electron    | Tauri       |
| -------------------------------------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| Linux: Flatpak                         | ~374-536 MB | ~347-380 MB |
| Linux: Debian                          | ~171.2 MB   | ~493.7 MB   |
| macOS                                  | ~260 MB     | ~326 MB     |
| Windows                                | ~166 MB     | ~211 MB     |

Unfortunately RAM usage is not much less compared to Electron, often Delta Chat Tauri even uses more RAM than Electron.

### State of Tauri Edition

The Tauri edition has all features that the Electron version has (except for calling and the location streaming map), but there are still some bugs especially on Linux, which prevent us from fully switching to Tauri.

The Tauri edition also has a few extras that the Electron Edition has not:

- autostart on system startup

> - webxdc apps start instantly without a loading bar

Author: ```suggestion
```
